November the 23rd, we're testing the tape,
getting ready to chat with Mike House. We're at his
BMW dealership in Albuquerque. Mike, add a
sentence there. Albuquerque, New Mexico, matter
of fact.
Mike, as we begin, would you give a brief
biographical summary where you grew up and what
your parents and so forth before getting to A&M.
Where was home? I was born in 1951, July 1951. At the
time, my dad worked for American Airlines, and
about every two years he would travel. And dad and
mom, as a matter of fact, I was to be... born in
Buffalo New York where dad was and dad wanted to
make sure mom wanted to make sure I was a Texan so she
flew home right about delivery time and lived with
her mom and dad for about three weeks to make sure I
was born in Texas and I was born in Ennis Texas which
is where they are retired today and flew back to
Buffalo and moved around a bit but ended up and grew
up the majority of my life in Dallas and when I was a
freshman in high school between freshman and
sophomore moved to San Antonio Graduated in San
Antonio from Churchill High School. And thought I
wanted to go into oceanography. And Texas A&M had a
program that was top notch. I thought I might be
interested in also flying. So the Air Force
interested me and the ROTC program interested me.
And as a story in itself, I got in by the skin of my
teeth by going through the junction program. And
that created some bonding that's gone on to this
day. Got into A&M in 69 and in four years was able to
graduate with a business administration degree
with a management major. All right, so my next
question is going to be, why did you attend A&M? You
attended A&M partly because of what you thought
your major was going to be. That is correct. Had you
been to visit before you came to enroll? No, I had
never been to the campus prior to three or four days
before the freshman's In those days, different
than my kids now, I don't remember the choices. And
not that Dad wouldn't have given them to me if I
would have asked for them. This was my interest,
and he did everything he could to help me go that
direction. But I didn't have a Newsweek book with
180 universities to choose from. That just seemed
like a logical choice. So you went to Junction that
first summer. Correct. Did you come to College
Station and then go to Junction? No, I went to
Junction first. I went to Junction and committed
six weeks and about seven hours in college courses
to see if I would be qualified academically. And I
guess I was just hoping I liked that email at this
point. Did your mom drive you, mom and dad drive you
out to Junction? I remember mom and dad, I had a
little MG midget, and I remember my mom and dad
followed me in that MG midget out to Junction and
dropped me off. I have not yet interviewed anyone
about Junction. So please describe that as fully
as you can. Oh, that's a great, it was a great
program. There were probably, if I were to pick a
number, 40 or 50 of us, and we lived in a barrack kind
of thing, and it had no windows, but it was
screened, and bunk beds, and a common bath, and
there were probably a half dozen upperclassmen
that were there, and I guess they were taking
courses as well, but they were predominantly
there for supervision. And I took biology and a
lab. And I took, seemed like it was an English
course and got a PE credit. So I came out with
probably three or four credits through that
science and another three credits for the
English. And I ended up with a strong B throughout.
So that got me in without a problem. And of that
group, there were probably 12 or so in my cabin or my
barrack. And probably... Eight or nine of those
made it to A&M, and I bet there wasn't of those 12,
two or three of us eventually graduated. Things
happen. I can remember that it's a summer camp feel
and really heavy on physical. I'm a runner, and I
was a runner at the time. I was the first guy I can
remember at that semester to be able to run up to the
cross, which was about a five mile up and five mile
back. And you go up at the top, there's this big
cross at the top of the junction. Then we got a group
together, and we'd run it about every other day,
because it got to be then at YDD Special. It was just
a fun time. They had a big creek and river that went
through there, and we had some swimming
certification that we had to do. And once
everybody knew that they could swim, then it was a
matter of pushing that program as far as we could.
We were in and out of the water all the time. There
were wild turkey. I remember wild turkey roaming
around all the time. Deer. And then I can remember
the... the uh the uh shaving cream fights and the
restroom you know having a common bath with all
those guys it was just you know running around in
underwear and things that you just couldn't do
normally and food was great and the atmosphere it
was hot but you were never sweating you know and i'd
probably go back to junction and i'd drip all the
time but just something about i guess it's just
your expectations and it just the whole thing was
right and you'd go into town and the town was two
streets And you'd feel like you went into San
Antonio, you know, because you've just been
confined in this little deal. But I had the
opportunity about a year and a half ago, I made a
special trip as I was going to San Antonio to go
through Junction. And to drive down that road and
see, I think Texas Tech owns it now. And it looked
like it was some kind of a researcher or teacher
development deal or something. And it was a
little, it was sad. Not that it didn't look good,
but it was sad not that it wasn't the way it was. Do
you remember who the teachers were in those two
courses? Absolutely not. I couldn't help you one
out. I know we dissected frogs and animals and that
kind of thing. I just don't remember the details.
What, Louie Hauer in English or Bill Barzak?
Wasn't either of those. Just too many years, I'll
tell you. Because I've never heard anything but
positive about Junction, the Junction
experience by the youngsters who were out there.
Describe a typical day. What time did you get up? It
was an early morning day, but it was early morning
like Sunday. 6.30 to 7, and no formation or
anything. And I think breakfast was, they almost
required you to have breakfast. I don't recall. I
just remember I always had breakfast. I'm not a big
breakfast eater. And you would, it seemed like
you'd do classes all morning, and then the
afternoon would tend to fletch between some kind
of academic and some kind of extracurricular
activity. All right, what about the biology lab?
Did you do that in the afternoon? Ah. Gosh, that was
1960. 30 years ago. I would tend to say we did it in
the morning. It seemed like the morning was pretty
much academic time. And the afternoons, I can
remember the afternoons were so hot that, again,
we didn't sweat, but they were hot. And I can
remember you did have some nap time on your own, or
you just had free time. But you could take a nap, or
you could go for a run, or you could go down to the
river, or just do whatever you wanted to do. It
wasn't every hour regimented. I guess if they were
old enough then, that would be time that we would
use as our own responsibility. Now, you mentioned
a little bit of playing around with shaving cream
and things like that. Were there any things that
happened that now, in retrospect, that were in bad
taste, too extreme? No, no. I would think, of what I
recall, the things we did at A&M by choice were a
notch more than we did at Junction. Junction was
kind of a coming out time, and I think we might have
had a little reservation, a little less
confidence in ourselves maybe than we did when we
got to A&M. But it was all a good humor, tame thing.
So you did six weeks there and then went home, then
came back in the fall to A&M. Right. Did you come in
that little MG? I came in the MG, yeah. You remember
it took about, it had windows that were screwed in
instead of rolled up, and it took about three weeks
before one of my windows was taken, and it took
about another three weeks before one of the
tachometers was taken. It just wasn't a good time
to have a sports car in a place like Texas A&M. I was
definitely on the cutting edge of European cars.
And you were in the Corps. right so that what what
gear did you bring what kind of stuff
but
I've been forewarned that they just don't allow a
whole lot. And I didn't bring much. And I had kind of
an unusual and unfortunate circumstance. We
came, I think, about a week early or five days
early. And about three days into that, my
grandmother passed away unexpectedly. And so I
had to leave for a couple days for the funeral. And
when I came back, classes were in session. And
everybody, it was a little tough because the other
freshmen had another two or three days to work on
traditions. how to do things, and I kind of had to
pop in midstream, and people that didn't know me
didn't give me that benefit of the doubt. So it was a
sink or swim for the first week there, but I caught
on fire. Describe your outfit and where you lived
and so forth. Hellcat 9, which is no longer there,
and it was a tight group, but the seniors were, you
didn't know the seniors, they were, I don't know
how it is today, but you just didn't allow the
camaraderie with the older folks. Juniors, you
knew a little bit, like 20%. Seniors, you might
have known less than 5%. Juniors, 20%, 25%. And
then the sophomores, you knew them 90%. They were
your face all the time. And I can remember, I mean,
there was hazing, but it's nothing that we didn't
all involve in and enjoy. But you wouldn't know.
You wouldn't go to the toilet. You'd tend to use
your sink if you could. Just because you didn't
want to get out and have to hit the wall and answer 12
questions and do another 73 push-ups. I was class
of 73, so that was the push-ups and set-ups I was
doing all the time. But I could rattle them off
pretty good. But you just didn't get out any more
than you had to. So you arrived in the fall of 60?
Fall of 69.
Describe a typical weekday for you that freshman
year? What did it begin and what happened go
through the whole day? It seemed like they woke us
up with a normal chime up and down the hall. One of
the freshmen would have to do his rhyme.
I can't remember the rhyme. But they'd wake you up
going up and down the hall and you'd have 15 or 20
minutes to get ready, and there was enough chaos
that you probably didn't get hazed that 15 or 20
minutes because everybody was running to showers
and using the toilet and that kind of thing, and
you'd be on the wall, and you'd spend probably at
least 5, no more than 10 minutes on the wall, and
you'd have to be speaking Spanish all the way up and
down. And I was one of the few that bought Corfam
shoes. That's when Corfam came out. And I was able
to get, I bet I didn't know five people that got
through their whole freshman year with Corfam
shoes. Because if the upperclassmen found out you
did, oh, they would, we'd get thrown away. But if
you could save them, it sure saved a lot of shiny
time. And I had Corfam shoes, which helped me a lot.
I also didn't change my bed sheets the first,
probably, well, until Christmas. And I took them
home Christmas holiday, and I had to throw them
away. What I would do is keep everything tucked
very tight and slide in very gingerly. and then
slide out. And I guess I wouldn't turn over at
night, because I never screwed up my tuck. But you
would. They didn't wash real well that semester.
But back in the day, you'd have your five or 10
minutes of up against the wall, and the sophomores
quizzing you, and a few juniors walking down, just
kind of giving you a hard time. Then you'd go out in
formation. They would probably question you
another five minutes, and then you'd have
the wake-up call and everything, and then you'd
march to the, is it Sabisa Hall? Were you at
Northgate or Southgate? Were you at Northside or
the, or was it Duncan? Duncan, Duncan, not Sabisa,
Duncan. Duncan, you'd go to Duncan, and you'd
have, the meal would be, it would be difficult the
first ten minutes, and then the upperclassmen
would get to eat, and then you'd eat, and then you'd
come back, and most of the upperclassmen were out
of the way because they were already in the room.
You'd hustle in your room, hope you wouldn't get
delayed, get your books, get on the class. And then
the day was pretty tame. I mean, you just kind of
kept your nose clean. It was fine. And then at
dinner time, you would have to go in formation
again, same routine, march to dinner, and come
back. And I can remember that you had until 7.30
before you had to do your study. And you would study
from 7.30 to 10.00. And then there were like 30
minutes of free time, but nobody left the rooms
because they didn't want to get hazed, but you'd
call or the phone would do whatever. And then at
10.30, the lights out, unless you could get an
upperclassman to allow you to maybe use a small
minor's pipeline or something to continue
studying. If you had any free time in the
afternoons, any unscheduled time, what did you
do? you know academically i had to work hard there
were a lot of other ones that became easier to and i i
used a lot of my afternoon studying where um
usually i either use they had i don't know what
they're called but they're small little retreats
between the dorms this kind of common area and i
would find a corner and everybody leave you alone
to go pretty well or i would use the library And if I
use a library a lot, but if I had free time, I still
like to run and I will run most every day and I will
try to do that in the afternoon and get away from
just get away from the dorms for an hour a day. Was
your freshman roommate a special person as you
look back? Did y'all have a Yeah, he remains one I'm
in contact with. He's a pilot for American
Airlines. I just had him for the first And then in my
sophomore year, I got a second roommate. I had one
or two roommates that I'm still close with. At the
very first of my freshman year, I settled in after
about a month. Had him all freshman year. Remain
close to him to this day. And then I had a new
roommate that graduated with me, and he's a pilot
for Continental and Guam. And he remained in the
club. Make believe that I had never heard about
chow hall routine and food and so forth. Describe
A&M chow hall habits and food and so forth. Well, I
ate well because I didn't, I wasn't afraid of the
system. I enjoyed the system. And I found ways to
get around the system and to abuse the
upperclassmen that pushed the system as much as I
could get away with it. So I would kind of put myself
in the forefront. And by doing that, that might
have picked on you at first and quizzed you a lot the
initial part of the meal because you had to stay at
attention and you had to square your bites and you
had to ask for food by the name, the alien name, and
ask in a certain way. And if you go ahead and jump
into that and do it, they tend to leave you alone
more than the guy that's kind of mild and meek and
fat and calorie. And by doing that, I ate well, and
then they would leave, and I would eat even better.
And if there was an upperclassman that was giving
me a hard time, I would find a way to use the system to
help me get back to him. And it's nothing of a total
aggressive type of way, but it's just more of a
competitive spirit that the Corps created at that
time, and I assume still has today. What were some
of the food names, nicknames? Spuds. Bullneck was
meat. Cow was
milk. Bread.
Was that dill? Still, that's exactly what it is. I
don't remember, but that's exactly what it was.
Did iced tea or coffee have a nickname? If so, I
don't recall. See, I'm not a coffee drinker, so
that's why I wouldn't have thought about it. I
don't remember when it happened. What about
things like green beans or mash? Yeah, mash. They
had names. They had names, but I just can't
remember. And I've heard that a few freshmen got in
trouble at home at Thanksgiving when they slipped
and asked for a certain food. There were some, and I
can't tell what they were, but there were some
foods that had edgy names. Yes. And I did it. I just
know I did because everything else slipped out one
time or the other. You'd get around other people
and it would just really be bad. Were there any,
I'll call it games, were there any games played by
you and your fish buddies at the table? Any things
that y'all did maybe to get back at sophomores or
other upperclassmen? Yeah, and some I wouldn't
repeat. Oh, okay. But it all kind of worked out, and
I can remember putting gravy on the shoes, and
they'd make you sit under the table if you did
something wrong, and I'd have a pass food down, and
I'd take up the sides of your sole with mashed
potatoes or something. And they wouldn't catch it
until later and not have any idea how it happened.
And I will tell you that we were able to put things in
the food and whatnot just so that at least we'd feel
better about buying it. But to this day, they don't
know. So it all kind of worked out. Let's see. You
mentioned the name of your outfit. Do you hold that
outfit closely in your heart? Yeah, I do. It's real
tough, though. You go back. I've been back five or
six times. Since there isn't a squad of
nine-year-olds, it kind of pulls at you. You go
back to the dorm that you were in and find your room.
As
you
went to class, did you and your friends have a
routine about class, where to sit, what to carry to
class, how to make contact with the instructor?
I don't remember that being anything that
specific. I remember getting the class, you would
quickly learn what would be the least suggestive
way to get to class. And you would also, you'd have a
way of walking by someone with them really
wondering if you did see them. Because if they did
think you saw them and not speak, well, you would be
in trouble. But you knew half the guys you'd speak
to would slow you down, so you didn't want to speak
to them half the time. So you'd find ways to dodge
things and Did
you have any classes that freshman year that, as
you look back, either the subject or the
instructor was very important to you?
I got the feeling most of them were all way too big
and just a little harder than they needed to be to
the degree that I think they were really trying to
lead us on. And the professors had two to three
hundred people, which was like chemistry,
history, math was a little smaller than math was
good, English was a reasonable size. But I just
felt like that AEM's criteria to get in was pretty
easy in those days. All
right, but you were saying that the Junction
helped you get in school. How academically, how
well did you do that first year? I did fine. I was
probably in fine relative. I mean, for me, I was
just happy to be there and stay there. I probably
had a three, five, six, seven, something like
that. And I can remember of the, we had a map that
somewhere in the city for 35 and 40 freshmen
started. And we had, I think the number was 13 of
them graduated. So, although that sounds like
maybe a big number, it's too sad because I can think
back to the other 25, 30 kids, and they were all
great kids. And just the circumstances were
different in these places. Please share, if you
can, some jokes, pranks, good bull, that you and
other freshmen pulled off.
I can remember having
an opportunity to wake up in the morning and a
junior or senior came to you and said he wanted you
to be a fellow junior or senior. you could do that in
Puerto Rico and see who you are and everything
else. And they couldn't get back at you because, in
fact, you were a messenger from someone else, but
they didn't know who it was, which is a big mystery.
And I can remember, I can remember recording one
guy with me, and he was one of the biggest, toughest
guys in the world. And me and a couple of guys came in
at 2 a.m. and flipped on the lights. And
he was a scared person. And it was just amazing to
see a 252 or 275 pound guy that was three or four
years older grabbing on the edge of his bed, just
pleading me not to take him out of the room. And we
would, and we'd take him out. But probably one of
the better ones I can remember was the stripper guy
who had a longer sack coming from one of the lights
out front. And we did it about 5, 5.30, and the
formation was about
what
retribution
did he wreak on you perpetrators
typically
There's just a limited amount they could do as far
as quizzing you or making you do cooking. You know,
my freshman year, I was like 100, and I could do
1,000 servings. So there's nothing they could do
to really amuse me, and there's no question,
lore-wise, traditionalizing that. So there's
just not a whole lot they could do. They could sure
try, but by Thanksgiving, you were so much in the
system that you were going to make it. Nothing
bothered you. And they could kind of tell, and
there's really not a whole lot they could do. Did
your squadron commander's footlocker
disappear? He did, and we did. We'd walk up and run
the hall for a couple hours, and we had steam
showers half a dozen times. And we probably had a
couple baths before that. We probably had one or
two baths, but I knew that it was, you know, it was
also part of that business position deal that, you
know, being a runner, I was always, this was back in
the 60s when being in strength wasn't so big of a
deal. I enjoyed that kind of time. And so, to me, I
always look at that in myself as, well, I'll give
myself a better shot at this. All right, now, how
did you all get the locker? We had, at the time, we
probably had about 30 guys there. And we assigned
responsibilities for each of the guys. And we took
a seat. Our senior, he was a leader. really
sharp,
polished kind of guy. And so we
took him out, and they did about two miles out of
town. They did give him a bath. And they let him off
about 2 a.m., just in the middle of the garden. And
he didn't get bathed until about 4 a.m. or 8 p.m. So
did you take the locker while he was out? Yeah.
Where did y'all have the locker? I wasn't in charge
of that. I don't remember that. I was in charge. I
was one of the guys that got him and took him out to
the car. Did the footlocker reappear at
Thanksgiving? The footlocker did reappear at
Thanksgiving. But there was some definite time
there. That's right. There was some pretty strong
hazing going on in between. until they did appear.
But we held them as long as we needed to hold them. It
wasn't like we cowered in front of them. What about
drownouts? Were there any drownouts in your out
that much? Would a drownout be in the room?
Throwing water in the room, turning the sex on and
leaving them on in that country? Or dumping water
on them while they were asleep? We did some of that.
I can remember one guy we did that. We spent all week
doing that. We filled up his room How deep
was it? The whole
room was full. He opened the door, and it fell into
the hall, and you couldn't see six inches in the
room. It was full of building paper. We did a few
duck walks, and we spent hours on that one, too.
Were you all then assigned to clean it up since you
were freshmen? No, he didn't know he did it. And we
really kept it quiet long enough to get it passed
until a point where we really didn't have a problem
with it. That's how great it is. All right. What was
it like to be a sophomore the next year? It was
heavy. I didn't really get off on it.
I
enjoyed
my outfit. I started enjoying some of the guys. It
was more better. I can remember my freshman year, I
couldn't have anything on my wall except for the
bulletin board. It had to be a bulletin board. My
sophomore year, they let me have a radio. They let
me have a small plug-in radio. But you still
couldn't have a stereo. You couldn't have the
outfits. You could have In the
academics, look at the whole time you were there,
who were, as you look back now, some important
teachers, advisors, counselors, that
affected you? He really enjoyed seeing me learn
that he I
was too busy to look beyond and to think, well, if I
get this guy, this grade, how am I going to get this?
Because he's a judge of every service. And that
kind of tainted my feeling to him that as a
professor, he would explain it better than
anyone. And I had a professor prior to him that must
have been my dad, must have had a program in my
junior year. And I had a fellow in my sophomore
year, my freshman year, Thank
you.
When
did you turn away from oceanography?